#9 Add design for integration test framework (#138)
exasol/extension-manager: doc/extension_developer_guide.md

# Extension Developer Guide

This guide describes how to create and test extension definitions for the Extension Manager.

## Extensions

Extensions are located in the repositories of the virtual schema implementations, e.g. `s3-document-files-virtual-schema`.

> Tests for extensions are:
> * Verify correct implementation of a specific version of the `extension-manager-interface` using the TypeScript compiler
> * Unit tests written in TypeScript verify all execution paths of the extension
> * Integration tests written in Java use a specific version of the `extension-manager` to verify that the extension
>   * can be loaded
>   * can install a virtual schema and check that it works
>   * can update parameters of an existing virtual schema
>   * can upgrade a virtual schema created with an older version
>   * ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tests for an extensions usually will include
* Using the TypeScript compiler to verify correct implementation of a specific version of the `extension-manager-interface`
* Unit tests written in TypeScript to verify all execution paths of the extension's implementation.
* Integration tests written in Java using a specific version of the `extension-manager` to verify that the extension
  * can be loaded
  * can install a virtual schema and check that it works
  * can update parameters of an existing virtual schema
  * can upgrade a virtual schema created with an older version
  * ...
```

> ### Restrictions as Document Virtual Schemas Only Support a Single Version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Restrictions as Document-based Virtual Schemas Only Support a Single Version
```

> Document virtual schemas like `s3-document-files-virtual-schema` require a `SET SCRIPT` that must have a specific name. As this script references a specific virtual schema JAR archive, it is not possible to install multiple version of the same virtual schema in the same database `SCHEMA`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Document-based virtual schemas like `s3-document-files-virtual-schema` require a `SET SCRIPT` that must have a specific name. As this script references a specific virtual schema JAR archive, it is not possible to install multiple version of the same virtual schema in the same database schema.
```

> This means that in order to test a new version of a virtual schema, you need to create a new `SCHEMA` with the required database objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that in order to test a new version of a virtual schema, you need to create a new database schema with the required database objects.
```

## Extension Manager Interface

Extension definitions are written in TypeScript and compiled to a single JavaScript file. They implement the [extension-manager-interface](https://github.com/exasol/extension-manager-interface/). See [testing-extension](../extension-manager-integration-test-java/testing-extension) for an example including build scripts.

## Extension Integration Test Framework for Java

The Extension Integration Test Framework for Java (EITFJ) allows writing integration tests for extensions and their extension definitions.

### Preconditions

> We assume your extension definition project is located in folder `$EXTENSION`. `$EXTENSION_ID` is the filename of your JavaScript extension definition.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We assume your extension project is located in folder `$EXTENSION`. `$EXTENSION_ID` is the filename of your JavaScript extension definition.
```

The project in `$EXTENSION` must fulfill the following preconditions:
* NPM modules are already installed to `node_modules` before running integration tests.
* `package.json` is configured to build the extension definition with `npm run build`.
* The build process writes the JavaScript file to `$EXTENSION/dist/$EXTENSION_ID`

> If your extension definition uses a different build process you can create a custom `ExtensionBuilder`.

Reviewer: Is this about the extension's _definition_ or its _implementation_?

### Using EITFJ

The EITFJ library is published to [Maven Central](https://central.sonatype.com/artifact/com.exasol/extension-manager-integration-test-java), so you can add it to your project as follows:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>com.exasol</groupId>
    <artifactId>extension-manager-integration-test-java</artifactId>
    <version>$VERSION</version>
    <scope>test</scope>
</dependency>
```

> See [`ExampleIT.java`](../extension-manager-integration-test-java/src/test/java/com/exasol/extensionmanager/ExampleIT.java) for an example of how to use EITFJ in your test. Adapt the following constants depending to your own extension definition:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [`ExampleIT.java`](../extension-manager-integration-test-java/src/test/java/com/exasol/extensionmanager/ExampleIT.java) for an example of how to use EITFJ in your integration tests. Adapt the following constants depending to your own extension definition:
```

* `EXTENSION_SOURCE_DIR`: relative path to the directory containing the extension definition sources (`$EXTENSION`)
* `EXTENSION_ID`: file name of the built JavaScript file (`$EXTENSION_ID`)

Depending on the requirements of your extension you might also need to upload the adapter JAR or a JDBC driver to BucketFS in `@BeforeAll`.

#### Features of class `ExtensionManagerSetup`

Class `ExtensionManagerSetup` offers the following useful features:

* `ExtensionManagerSetup.create()` downloads and starts the EM REST interface, builds your extension definition and adds it to EM's extension registry.
* Call `setup.client()` to get a client for the EM's REST interface. It allows you to install your extension, create a new instance etc.

> * Call `setup.client().assertRequestFails()` to verify that a REST call fails with an expected status code and error message. This allows testing that your extension definitions throws an expected `Error`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Call `setup.client().assertRequestFails()` to verify that a REST call fails with an expected status code and error message. This allows testing that your extension definitions throws an expected error.
```

* Call `setup.previousVersionManager()` to prepare a previous version of your extension. This is useful for testing the upgrade process.

> * Call `setup.exasolMetadata()` to verify that expected database object like `SCRIPT`, `CONNECTION` or `VIRTUAL SCHEMA` where created.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Call `setup.exasolMetadata()` to verify that expected database objects like `SCRIPT`, `CONNECTION` or `VIRTUAL SCHEMA` were created.
```

* Call `setup.addVirtualSchemaToCleanupQueue()` and `setup.addConnectionToCleanupQueue()` to delete a `CONNECTION` or `VIRTUAL SCHEMA` after a test.

### EITFJ Configuration

EITFJ works without additional configuration. During development you can however create file `extension-test.properties` to simplify local testing. We recommend adding this file to `.gitignore` to avoid accidentally committing it.

`extension-test.properties` supports the following optional settings:

> * `localExtensionManager`: Path to a local clone of the `extension-manager` repository. This allows testing against a local extension manager that was not yet released. By default EITFJ will install extension manager using `go install`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `localExtensionManager`: Path to a local clone of the `extension-manager` repository. This allows testing against a local version of extension manager that was not yet released. By default EITFJ will install extension manager using `go install`.
```
